THE BUSINESS PLAN ROAD MAP TO SUCCESS

By the end of this lesson you should be able to:

*    Understand the role of the business plan.
*    List several reasons for developing a business plan.
*    Identify sources where you can get help in developing a
     business plan.
*    Identify the type of information to include in the business
     plan.
*    Prepare an outline for a business plan.


THE BUSINESS PLAN - BUSINESS PLAN OUTLINE

Below is an outline for a business plan. Use this model as a 
guide when developing the business plan for your business.

Elements of a Business Plan

1. Cover sheet
2. Statement of purpose
3. Table of contents

I. The Business
    A. Description of business
    B. Marketing 
    C. Competition
    D. Operating procedures
    E. Personnel
    F. Business insurance
    G. Financial data

II. Financial Data
    A. Loan applications
    B. Capital equipment and supply list
    C. Balance sheet
    D. Breakeven analysis
    E. Pro-forma income projections (profit & loss statements)
         -     Three-year summary
         -     Detail by month, first year
         -     Detail by quarters, second and third years
         -     Assumptions upon which projections were based
    F. Pro-forma cash flow
         -     Follow guidelines for letter E.

III. Supporting Documents
         -     Tax returns of principals for last three years
         -     Personal financial statement (all banks have these
               forms)
         -     In the case of a franchised business, a copy of
               franchise contract and all supporting documents
               provided by the franchisor
         -     Copy of proposed lease or purchase agreement for
               building space
         -     Copy of licenses and other legal documents
         -     Copy of resumes of all principals
         -     Copies of letters of intent from suppliers, etc.


                  THE BUSINESS PLAN - WHAT IT INCLUDES


What goes in a business plan? This is an excellent question. And,
it is one that many new and potential small business owners 
should ask, but oftentimes don't ask. The body of the business 
plan can be divided into four distinct sections: 1) the 
description of the business, 2) the marketing plan, 3) the
financial management plan and 4) the management plan. Addenda to
the business plan should include the executive summary, 
supporting documents and financial projections.



THE BUSINESS PLAN -   DESCRIPTION OF THE BUSINESS 

In this section, provide a detailed description of your business.
An excellent question to ask yourself is: "What business am I 
in?" In answering this question include your products, market and
services as well as a thorough description of what makes your
business unique. Remember, however, that as you develop your
business plan, you may have to modify or revise your initial
questions.

The business description section is divided into three primary
sections. Section 1 actually describes your business, Section 2 
the product or service you will be offering and Section 3 the
location of your business, and why this location is desirable (if
you have a franchise, some franchisors assist in site selection). 

1. Business Description

When describing your business, generally you should explain:

     1.     Legalities - business form: proprietorship,
            partnership, corporation. The licenses or permits
            you will need.
     2.     Business type: merchandizing, manufacturing or
            service.
     3.     What your product or service is.
     4.     Is it a new independent business, a takeover, an
            expansion, a franchise?
     5.     Why your business will be profitable. What are the
            growth opportunities? Will franchising impact on
            growth opportunities?
     6.     When your business will be open (days, hours)?
     7.     What you have learned about your kind of business
            from outside sources (trade suppliers, bankers, other
            franchise owners, franchisor, publications).

A cover sheet goes before the description. It includes the name,
address and telephone number of the business and the names of all
principals. In the description of your business, describe the
unique aspects and how or why they will appeal to consumers.
Emphasize any special features that you feel will appeal to
customers and explain how and why these features are appealing. 

The description of your business should clearly identify goals 
and objectives and it should clarify why you are, or why you want
to be, in business.


THE BUSINESS PLAN -    2. Product/Service

Try to describe the benefits of your goods and services from your
customers' perspective. Successful business owners know or at 
least have an idea of what their customers want or expect from
them. This type of anticipation can be helpful in building 
customer satisfaction and loyalty. And, it certainly is a good
strategy for beating the competition or retaining your
competitiveness. Describe:

     1.     What you are selling.
     2.     How your product or service will benefit the 
            customer.
     3.     Which products/services are in demand; if there will  
            be a steady flow of cash.
     4.     What is different about the product or service your
            business is offering.


THE BUSINESS PLAN -    3. The Location

The location of your business can play a decisive role in its
success or failure. Your location should be built around your
customers, it should be accessible and it should provide a sense 
of security. Consider these questions when addressing this 
section of your business plan:

     1.     What are your location needs?
     2.     What kind of space will you need?
     3.     Why is the area desirable? the building desirable?
     4.     Is it easily accessible? Is public transportation
            available? Is street lighting adequate?
     5.     Are market shifts or demographic shifts occurring?

It may be a good idea to make a checklist of questions you 
identify when developing your business plan. Categorize your
questions and, as you answer each question, remove it from your
list.


THE BUSINESS PLAN -     The Marketing Plan

Marketing plays a vital role in successful business ventures. How
well you market you business, along with a few other
considerations, will ultimately determine your degree of success 
or failure. The key element of a successful marketing plan is to
know your customers -- their likes, dislikes, expectations. By
identifying these factors, you can develop a marketing strategy
that will allow you to arouse and fulfill their needs.

Identify your customers by their age, sex, income/educational 
level and residence. At first, target only those customers who 
are more likely to purchase your product or service. As your
customer base expands, you may need to consider modifying the
marketing plan to include other customers.

Develop a marketing plan for your business by answering these
questions. (Potential franchise owners will have to use the
marketing strategy the franchisor has developed.) Your marketing
plan should be included in your business plan and contain answers
to the questions outlined below.

     1.     Who are your customers? Define your target market(s).
     2.     Are your markets growing? steady? declining?
     3.     Is your market share growing? steady? declining?
     4.     If a franchise, how is your market segmented?
     5.     Are your markets large enough to expand? 
     6.     How will you attract, hold, increase your market 
            share? If a franchise, will the franchisor provide    
            assistance in this area? Based on the franchisor's
            strategy? how will you promote your sales? 
     7.     What pricing strategy have you devised?

Appendix I contains a sample Marketing Plan and Marketing Tips,
Tricks and Traps, a condensed guide on how to market your product
or service. Study these documents carefully when developing the
marketing portion of your business plan.


THE BUSINESS PLAN -    1. Competition 

Competition is a way of life. We compete for jobs, promotions,
scholarships to institutes of higher learning, in sports -- and 
in almost every aspect of your lives. Nations compete for the
consumer in the global marketplace as do individual business
owners. Advances in technology can send the profit margins of a
successful business into a tailspin causing them to plummet
overnight or within a few hours. When considering these and other
factors, we can conclude that business is a highly competitive,
volatile arena. Because of this volatility and competitiveness, 
it is important to know your competitors.

Questions like these can help you:

     1.     Who are your five nearest direct competitors?
     2.     Who are your indirect competitors?
     3.     How are their businesses: steady? increasing?
            decreasing?
     4.     What have you learned from their operations? from
            their advertising?
     5.     What are their strengths and weaknesses?
     6.     How does their product or service differ from yours?

Start a file on each of your competitors. Keep manila envelopes 
of their advertising and promotional materials and their pricing
strategy techniques. Review these files periodically, determining
when and how often they advertise, sponsor promotions and offer
sales. Study the copy used in the advertising and promotional
materials, and their sales strategy. For example, is their copy
short? descriptive? catchy? or how much do they reduce prices for
sales? Using this technique can help you to understand your
competitors better and how they operate their businesses.



THE BUSINESS PLAN  -    2. Pricing and Sales

Your pricing strategy is another marketing technique you can use 
to improve your overall competitiveness. Get a feel for the 
pricing strategy your competitors are using. That way you can
determine if your prices are in line with competitors in your
market area and if they are in line with industry averages. 

Some of the pricing strategies are:

     *     retail cost and pricing
     *     competitive position
     *     pricing below competition
     *     pricing above competition
     *     price lining
     *     multiple pricing
     *     service costs and pricing (for service businesses
           only)
           - service components
           - material costs
           - labor costs
           - overhead costs

The key to success is to have a well-planned strategy, to 
establish your policies and to constantly monitor prices and
operating costs to ensure profits. Even in a franchise where the
franchisor provides operational procedures and materials, it is a
good policy to keep abreast of the changes in the marketplace
because these changes can affect your competitiveness and profit
margins.

Appendix 1 contains a sample Price/Quality Matrix, review it for
ideas on pricing strategies for your competitors. Determine which
of the strategies they use, if it is effective and why it is
effective.



THE BUSINESS PLAN -  3. Advertising and Public Relations

How you advertise and promote your goods and services may make or
break your business. Having a good product or service and not
advertising and promoting it is like not having a business at 
all. Many business owners operate under the mistaken concept that
the business will promote itself, and channel money that should 
be used for advertising and promotions to other areas of the
business. Advertising and promotions, however, are the life line 
of a business and should be treated as such. 

Devise a plan that uses advertising and networking as a means to
promote your business. Develop short, descriptive copy (text
material) that clearly identifies your goods or services, its
location and price. Use catchy phrases to arouse the interest of
your readers, listeners or viewers. In the case of a franchise, 
the franchisor will provide advertising and promotional materials
as part of the franchise package, you may need approval to use 
any materials that you and your staff develop. Whether or not 
this is the case, as a courtesy, allow the franchisor the
opportunity to review, comment on and, if required, approve these
materials before using them. Make sure the advertisements you
create are consistent with the image the franchisor is trying to
project. Remember the more care and attention you devote to your
marketing program, the more successful your business will be.

A more detailed explanation of the marketing plan and how to
develop an effective marketing program is provided in the 
Workshop on Marketing. See Training Module 3 - Marketing Your
Business for Success. 
THE BUSINESS PLAN  -    THE MANAGEMENT PLAN

Managing a business requires more than just the desire to be your
own boss. It demands dedication, persistence, the ability to make
decisions and the ability to manage both employees and finances.
Your management plan, along with your marketing and financial
management plans, sets the foundation for and facilitates the
success of your business.

Like plants and equipment, people are resources -- they are the
most valuable asset a business has. You will soon discover that
employees and staff will play an important role in the total
operation of your business. Consequently, it's imperative that 
you know what skills you possess and those you lack since you 
will have to hire personnel to supply the skills that you lack.
Additionally, it is imperative that you know how to manage and
treat your employees. Make them a part of the team. Keep them
informed of, and get their feedback regarding, changes. Employees
oftentimes have excellent ideas that can lead to new market 
areas, innovations to existing products or services or new 
product lines or services which can improve your overall
competitiveness.  

Your management plan should answer questions such as:

     *     How does your background/business experience help you
           in this business?
     *     What are your weaknesses and how can you compensate
           for them?
     *     Who will be on the management team?
     *     What are their strengths/weaknesses?
     *     What are their duties?
     *     Are these duties clearly defined?
     *     If a franchise, what type of assistance can you expect
           from the franchisor?
     *     Will this assistance be ongoing?
     *     What are your current personnel needs?
     *     What are your plans for hiring and training personnel?
     *     What salaries, benefits, vacations, holidays will you
           offer? If a franchise, are these issues covered in the 
           management package the franchisor will provide?
     *     What benefits, if any, can you afford at this point?

If a franchise, the operating procedures, manuals and materials
devised by the franchisor should be included in this section of 
the business plan. Study these documents carefully when writing
your business plan, and be sure to incorporate this material. The
franchisor should assist you with managing your franchise. Take
advantage of their expertise and develop a management plan that
will ensure the success for your franchise and satisfy the needs
and expectations of employees, as well as the franchisor.



THE BUSINESS PLAN -   THE FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT PLAN

Sound financial management is one of the best ways for your
business to remain profitable and solvent. How well you manage 
the finances of your business is the cornerstone of every
successful business venture. Each year thousands of potentially
successful businesses fail because of poor financial management. 
As a business owner, you will need to identify and implement
policies that will lead to and ensure that you will meet your
financial obligations.

To effectively manage your finances, plan a sound, realistic 
budget by determining the actual amount of money needed to open
your business (start-up costs) and the amount needed to keep it
open (operating costs). The first step to building a sound
financial plan is to devise a start-up budget. Your start-up 
budget will usually include such one-time-only costs as major
equipment, utility deposits, down payments, etc. 

The start-up budget should allow for these expenses.

                           Start-up Budget

     * personnel (costs prior to opening)
     * legal/professional fees
     * occupancy
     * licenses/permits
     * equipment
     * insurance
     * supplies 
     * advertising/promotions
     * salaries/wages
     * accounting
     * income
     * utilities
     * payroll expenses

An operating budget is prepared when you are actually ready to 
open for business. The operating budget will reflect your
priorities in terms of how your spend your money, the expenses 
you will incur and how you will meet those expenses (income). 
Your operating budget also should include money to cover the 
first three to six months of operation. It should allow for the
following expenses.

                          Operating Budget

     * personnel
     * insurance
     * rent
     * depreciation
     * loan payments
     * advertising/promotions
     * legal/accounting
     * miscellaneous expenses
     * supplies
     * payroll expenses
     * salaries/wages
     * utilities
     * dues/subscriptions/fees
     * taxes
     * repairs/maintenance


The financial section of your business plan should include any 
loan applications you've filed, a capital equipment and supply
list, balance sheet, breakeven analysis, pro-forma income
projections (profit and loss statement) and pro-forma cash flow.
The income statement and cash flow projections should include a
three-year summary, detail by month for the first year, and 
detail by quarter for the second and third years.

The accounting system and the inventory control system that you
will be using is generally addressed in this section of the
business plan also. If a franchise, the franchisor may stipulate 
in the franchise contract the type of accounting and inventory
systems you may use. If this is the case, he or she should have a
system already intact and you will be required to adopt this
system. Whether you develop the accounting and inventory systems
yourself, have an outside financial advisor develop the systems 
or the franchisor provides these systems, you will need to 
acquire a thorough understanding of each segment and how it
operates. Your financial advisor can assist you in developing 
this section of your business plan. 

The following questions should help you determine the amount of
start-up capital you will need to purchase and open a franchise.

     *     How much money do you have?
     *     How much money will you need to purchase the
           franchise?
     *     How much money will you need for start-up?
     *     How much money will you need to stay in business?

Other questions that you will need to consider are:

     *     What type of accounting system will your use? Is it a  
           single entry or dual entry system?
     *     What will your sales goals and profit goals for the
           coming year be? If a franchise, will the franchisor
           set your sales and profit goals? Or, will he or she
           expect you to reach and retain a certain sales level   
           and profit margin?
     *     What financial projections will you need to include 
           in your business plan?
     *     What kind of inventory control system will you use?

Your plan should include an explanation of all projections. 
Unless you are thoroughly familiar with financial statements, get
help in preparing your cash flow and income statements and your
balance sheet. Your aim is not to become a financial wizard, but 
to understand the financial tools well enough to gain their
benefits. Your accountant or financial advisor can help you
accomplish this goal.

Sample balance sheets, income projections (profit and loss
statements) and cash flow statements are included in Appendix 2,
Financial Management. For a detailed explanation of these and 
other more complex financial concepts, contact your local SBA
Office. Look under the U.S. Government section of the local
telephone directory.


THE BUSINESS PLAN -    SELF-PACED ACTIVITY



During this activity you will:

     *     Briefly describe what goes into a business plan.

     *     Identify advantages of developing the marketing,
           management and financial management plans.

     *     List financial projections included in the financial
           management plan.

     *     Sketch an outline for a business plan.


THE BUSINESS PLAN -          APPENDIX 1

                              MARKETING

1. THE MARKETING PLAN
2. PRICE/QUALITY MATRIX
3. MARKETING TIPS, TRICKS & TRAPS
_________________________________________________________________
                         THE ENTREPRENEUR'S
                           MARKETING PLAN

This is the marketing plan of____________________________

I.   MARKET ANALYSIS
     A. Target Market - Who are the customers?
          1. We will be selling primarily to (check all that
             apply):

                                                    Total Percent
                                                     of Business

            a. Private sector         _______              ______
            b. Wholesalers            _______              ______
            c. Retailers              _______              ______
            d. Government             _______              ______
            e. Other                  _______              ______


          2. We will be targeting customers by:

             a. Product line/services.
                We will target specific lines    ________________
             b. Geographic area? Which areas?    ________________
             c. Sales? We will target sales of   ________________
             d. Industry? Our target industry is ________________
             e. Other?                           ________________

          3. How much will our selected market spend on our type
             of product or service this coming year?
             $________________

     B. Competition
          1. Who are our competitors?

             NAME       ________________________________________
             ADDRESS   _________________________________________
                       _________________________________________
             Years in Business              ___________________
             Market Share                   ___________________
             Price/Strategy                 ___________________
             Product/Service
                Features                    ___________________


             NAME     _________________________________________
             ADDRESS  _________________________________________
                      _________________________________________
             Years in Business             ____________________
             Market Share                  ____________________
             Price/Strategy                ____________________
             Product/Service
               Features                    ____________________

          2. How competitive is the market?

             High                          ____________________
             Medium                        ____________________
             Low                           ____________________

          3. List below your strengths and weaknesses compared to
             your competition (consider such areas as location,
             size of resources, reputation, services, personnel,  
             etc.):

            Strengths                                  Weaknesses

            1._______________________     1._____________________
            2._______________________     2._____________________
            3._______________________     3._____________________
            4._______________________     4._____________________

     C. Environment

          1. The following are some important economic factors
             that will affect our product or service (such as
             trade area growth, industry health, economic trends,
             taxes, rising energy prices, etc.):
             ________________________________________________
             ________________________________________________
             ________________________________________________

          2. The following are some important legal factors that  
             will affect our market:
             ________________________________________________
             ________________________________________________
             ________________________________________________

          3. The following are some important government factors:
             ________________________________________________
             ________________________________________________
             ________________________________________________

          4. The following are other environmental factors that
             will affect our market, but over which we have no
             control:
             ________________________________________________
             ________________________________________________
             ________________________________________________


II. PRODUCT OR SERVICE ANALYSIS
     A. Description
          1. Describe here what the product/service is and what
             it does:
             ________________________________________________
             ________________________________________________
             ________________________________________________
     B. Comparison
          1. What advantages does our product/service have over
             those of the competition (consider such things as
             unique features, patents, expertise, special
             training, etc.)?
             __________________________________________________
             __________________________________________________
             __________________________________________________

          2. What disadvantages does it have?
             __________________________________________________
             __________________________________________________
             __________________________________________________

     C. Some Considerations
          1. Where will you get your materials and supplies?
             __________________________________________________

          2. List other considerations:
             __________________________________________________
             __________________________________________________

III. MARKETING STRATEGIES - MARKET MIX

     A. Image

          1. First, what kind of image do we want to have (such
             as cheap but good, or exclusiveness, or customer-
             oriented or highest quality, or convenience, or
             speed, or ...)?
             __________________________________________________

     B. Features
          1. List the features we will emphasize:
              a. __________________________________________
              b. __________________________________________
              c. __________________________________________

     C. Pricing
          1. We will be using the following pricing strategy:
            a. Markup on cost      ____      What % markup? _____
            b. Suggested price     ____
            c. Competitive         ____
            d. Below competition   ____
            e. Premium price       ____
            f. Other               ____

          2. Are our prices in line with our image?
               YES___          NO___
          3. Do our prices cover costs and leave a margin of
             profit?
               YES___          NO___

     D. Customer Services
          1. List the customer services we provide:
             a. ____________________________________________
             b. ____________________________________________
             c. ____________________________________________
          2. These are our sales/credit terms:
              a. ____________________________________________
              b. ____________________________________________
              c._____________________________________________
           3. The competition offers the following services:
      a. ____________________________________________
      b. ____________________________________________
      c. ____________________________________________

     E. Advertising/Promotion
          1. These are the things we wish to say about the
             business:
             ____________________________________________________
             ____________________________________________________
             ____________________________________________________

          2. We will use the following advertising/promotion
             sources:
             1. Television                    ________
             2. Radio                         ________
             3. Direct mail                   ________
             4. Personal contacts             ________
             5. Trade associations            ________
             6. Newspaper                     ________
             7. Magazines                     ________
             8. Yellow Pages                  ________
             9. Billboard                     ________
            10. Other___________              ________

          3. The following are the reasons why we consider the
             media we have chosen to be the most effective:
             __________________________________________________
             __________________________________________________
             __________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________

                 MARKETING TIPS, TRICKS & TRAPS

1. Marketing Steps
         * Classifying Your Customers' Needs
         * Targeting Your Customer(s)
         * Examining Your "Niche"
         * Identifying Your Competitors

         * Assessing and Managing Your Available Resources

              - Financial
              - Human
              - Material
              - Production
_________________________________________________________________
               NOTES AND STRATEGIES FOR YOUR BUSINESS


_________________________________________________________________

                       MARKETING TIPS, TRICKS & TRAPS

2. Marketing Positioning

         * Follower versus Leader
         * Quality versus Price
         * Innovator versus Adaptor
         * Customer versus Product
         * International versus Domestic
         * Private Sector versus Government
_________________________________________________________________

           NOTES AND STRATEGIES FOR YOUR BUSINESS



_________________________________________________________________

                   MARKETING TIPS, TRICKS & TRAPS

3. Sales Strategy
      * Use Customer-Oriented Selling Approach - By Constructing
        Agreement

        * Phase One:        Establish Rapport with Customer - by
                            agreeing to discuss what the customer
                            wants to achieve.

        * Phase Two:        Determine Customer Objective and
                            Situational Factors - by agreeing on
                            what the customer wants to achieve
                            and those factors in the environment
                            that will influence these results.

        * Phase Three:      Recommend a Customer Action Plan - by
                            agreeing that using your product/
                            service will indeed achieve what
                            customer wants.

        * Phase Four:       Obtaining Customer Commitment - By
                            agreeing that the customer will
                            acquire your product/service.

      * Emphasize Customer Advantage

        Must be Read:       When a competitive advantage can not
                            be demonstrated, it will not
                            translate into a benefit.

        Must be Important 
        to the Customer:    When the perception of competitive
                            advantage varies between supplier and
                            customer, the customer wins.

        Must be Specific:   When a competitive advantage lacks
                            specificity, it translates into mere
                            puffery and is ignored.

        Must be Promotable: When a competitive advantage is
                            proven, it is essential that your
                            customer know it, lest it not exist
                            at all.

________________________________________________________________ 

                NOTES AND STRATEGIES FOR YOUR BUSINESS


_________________________________________________________________

                   MARKETING TIPS, TRICKS & TRAPS

4. Benefits vs. Features

   * The six "O's" of organizing Customer Buying Behavior

          ORIGINS of purchase:          Who buys it?
          OBJECTIVES of purchase:       What do they need/buy?
          OCCASIONS of purchase:        When do they buy it?
          OUTLETS of purchase:          Where do they buy it?
          OBJECTIVES of purchase:       Why do they buy it?
          OPERATIONS of purchase:       How do they buy it?

   * Convert features to benefits using the "...Which Means..."   
     Transition

   * Sales Maxim:       "Unless the proposition appeals to their
                        INTEREST, unless it satisfies their
                        DESIRES, and unless it shows them a
                        GAIN--then they will not buy!"

   * Quality Customer Leads:
           Level of need                  Ability to pay
           Authority to pay               Accessibility
           Sympathetic attitude           Business history
           One-source buyer               Reputation (price or
                                          quality buyer)

_________________________________________________________________

                   NOTES AND STRATEGIES FOR YOUR BUSINESS




_________________________________________________________________

                    CONVERT FEATURES INTO BENEFITS--
                   THE "...WHICH MEANS..." TRANSITION

FEATURES              "WHICH MEANS"            BENEFITS

Performance                                    Time Saved
Reputation                                     Reduced Cost
Components                                     Prestige
Colors                                         Bigger Savings
Sizes                                          Greater Profits
Exclusive                                      Greater 
                                                  Convenience
Uses                                           Uniform Production
Applications                                   Uniform Accuracy
Ruggedness                                     Continuous Output
Delivery                                       Leadership
Service                                        Increased Sales
Price                                          Economy of Use 
Design                                         Ease of Use
Availability                                   Reduced Inventory
Installation                                   Low Operating Cost
Promotion                                      Simplicity
Lab Tests                                      Reduced Upkeep
Terms                                          Reduced Waste
Workmanship                                    Long Life

                          BUYING MOTIVES
RATIONAL                                       EMOTIONAL

Economy of Purchase                            Pride of
                                                Appearance
Economy of Use                                 Pride of Ownership
Efficient Profits                              Desire of Prestige
Increased Profits                              Desire for
                                                Recognition
Durability                                     Desire to Imitate
Accurate Performance                           Desire for Variety
Labor-Saving                                   Safety
Time-Saving                                    Fear
Simple Construction                            Desire to Create
Simple Operation                               Desire for
                                                 Security
Ease of Repair                                 Convenience
Ease of Installation                           Desire to Be
                                                 Unique
Space-Saving                                   Curiosity
Increased Production
Availability
Complete Servicing
Good Workmanship
Low Maintenance
Thorough Research
Desire to be Unique
Curiosity
_________________________________________________________________

                      PRICE / QUALITY MATRIX
                           SALES APPEALS

PRICE/QUALITY   HIGH                  MEDIUM              LOW

HIGH        "Rolls Royce"        "We Try Harder"       "Best Buy"
               Strategy            Strategy             Strategy

MEDIUM     "Out Performs"     "Piece of the Rock" "Smart Shopper"
              Strategy             Strategy            Strategy

LOW       "Feature Packed"    "Keeps on Ticking"      "Bargain
             Strategy              Strategy              Hunter"
                                                        Strategy


THE BUSINESS PLAN -        APPENDIX 2

                        FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT


1. Income Projection Statement
   - Instructions for Income Projection Statement

2. Balance Sheet
   - Instructions for Balance Sheet

3. Monthly Cash Flow Projection
   - Instructions for Monthly Cash Flow Projection

4. Information Resources
_________________________________________________________________

                 INCOME PROJECTION STATEMENT

           Industry    J F M A M J J A S O N D  Annual   Annual
              %                                  total     %

Total net sales (revenues)
 Costs of sales
 Gross profit
 Gross profit margin
 
Controllable expenses
 Salaries/wages
 Payroll expenses
 Legal/accounting
 Advertising 
 Automobile
 Office supplies
 Dues/Subscriptions
 Utilities
 Miscellaneous
Total controllable
 expenses   

 Fixed expenses
 Rent
 Depreciation
 Utilities
 Insurance
 License/permits
 Loan payments
 Miscellaneous
 Total fixed expenses
 
Total expenses

Net profit (loss)
  before taxes

 Taxes

 Net profit (loss) after
          taxes

_________________________________________________________________

           INSTRUCTIONS FOR INCOME PROJECTIONS STATEMENT

The income projections (profit and loss) statement is valuable as
both a planning tool and a key management tool to help control
business operations. It enables the owner/manager to develop a
preview of the amount of income generated each month and for the
business year, based on reasonable predictions of monthly levels 
of sales, costs and expenses.

As monthly projections are developed and entered into the income
projections statement, they can serve as definite goals for
controlling the business operation. As actual operating results
become known each month, they should be recorded for comparison
with the monthly projections. A completed income statement allows
the owner/manager to compare actual figures with monthly
projections and to take steps to correct any problems.

Industry Percentage

In the industry percentage column, enter the percentages of total
sales (revenues) that are standard for your industry, which are
derived by dividing

               Costs/expenses items x 100%
               ___________________________ 
                  total net sales

These percentages can be obtained from various sources, such as
trade associations, accountants or banks. The reference librarian
in your nearest public library can refer you to documents that
contain the percentage figures, for example, Robert Morris
Associates' Annual Statement Studies (One Liberty Place,
Philadelphia, PA 19103).

Industry figures serve as a useful bench mark against which to
compare cost and expense estimates that you develop for your 
firm. Compare the figures in the industry percentage column to
those in the annual percentage column.


Total Net Sales (Revenues)

Determine the total number of units of products or services you
realistically expect to sell each month in each department at the
prices you expect to get. Use this step to create the projections
to review your pricing practices.

     - What returns, allowances and markdowns can be expected?

     - Exclude any revenue that is not strictly related to the
       business.

Cost of Sales

The key to calculating your cost of sales is that you do not
overlook any costs that you have incurred. Calculate cost of 
sales of all products and services used to determine total net
sales. Where inventory is involved, do not overlook 
transportation costs. Also include any direct labor.

Gross Profit

Subtract the total cost of sales from the total net sales to 
obtain gross profit.

Gross Profit Margin

The gross profit is expressed as a percentage of total sales
(revenues). It is calculated by dividing

                     gross profits
                     ______________
                     total net sales

Controllable (also known as Variable) Expenses

     - Salary expenses -- Base pay plus overtime.

     - Payroll expenses -- Include paid vacations, sick leave, 
       health insurance, unemployment insurance and social 
       security taxes.

     - Outside services -- Include costs of subcontracts,
       overflow work and special or one-time services.

     - Supplies -- Services and items purchased for use in the
       business.

     - Repair and maintenance -- Regular maintenance and repair,
       including periodic large expenditures such as painting.

     - Advertising -- Include desired sales volume and classified
       directory advertising expenses.

     - Car delivery and travel -- Include charges if personal car
       is used in business, including parking, tools, buying
       trips, etc.

     - Accounting and legal -- Outside professional services.

Fixed Expenses

     - Rent -- List only real estate used in business.

     - Depreciation -- Amortization of capital assets.

     - Utilities -- Water, heat, light, etc.

     - Insurance -- Fire or liability on property or products.
       Include workers' compensation.

     - Loan repayments -- Interest on outstanding loans.

     - Miscellaneous -- Unspecified; small expenditures without
       separate accounts.


Net Profit (loss)
(before taxes)      - Subtract total expenses from gross profit.

Taxes               - Include inventory and sales tax, excise
                      tax, real estate tax, etc.

Net Profit (loss)
(after taxes)       - Subtract taxes from net profit (before
                      taxes)

Annual Total        - For each of the sales and expense items in
                      your income projection statement, add all
                      the monthly figures across the table and
                      put the result in the annual total column.

Annual Percentage   - Calculate the annual percentage by dividing

                            Annual total x 100%
                            ___________________
                              total net sales

                    - Compare this figure to the industry
                      percentage in the first column.

_________________________________________________________________


                               BALANCE SHEET


                               COMPANY NAME
                    As of ____________________________, 19____

Assets

Current assets
  Cash                                          $_______

  Petty cash                                    $_______

  Accounts receivable                           $_______

  Inventory                                     $_______

  Short-term investment                         $_______

  Prepaid expenses                              $_______


Long-term investment                            $_______

Fixed assets
 Land                                           $_______

 Buildings                                      $_______

 Improvements                                   $_______

 Equipment                                      $_______

 Furniture                                      $_______

 Automobile/vehicles                            $_______


Other assets
 1.                                             $_______

 2.                                             $_______

 3.                                             $_______

 4.                                             $_______



     Total assets                                $______





Liabilities

Current Liabilities

  Accounts payable                               $______

  Notes payable                                  $______

  Interest payable                               $______

 Taxes payable
  Federal income tax                             $______
  State income tax                               $______
  Self-employment tax                            $______
  Sales tax (SBE)                                $______
  Property tax                                   $______

 Payroll accrual                                 $______
 
Long-term liabilities         

 Notes payable                                   $______

 Total liabilities                               $______


Net worth (owner equity)                         $______
  
 Proprietorship
      or
 Partnership
   (name's) equity                               $_____
   (name's) equity                               $_____
      or
 Corporation
  Capital stock                                  $_____
  Surplus paid in                                $_____
  Retained earnings                              $_____

   Total net worth                               $_____



 Total liabilities and
  total net worth                                $_____


(Total assets will always equal total liabilities and total net
worth)

________________________________________________________________


                       INSTRUCTIONS FOR BALANCE SHEET

Figures used to compile the balance sheet are taken from the
previous and current balance sheet as well as the current income
statement.  The income statement is usually attached to the 
balance sheet.  The following text covers the essential elements 
of the balance sheet.

At the top of the page fill in the legal name of the business, 
the type of statement and the day, month and year.


Assets

List anything of value that is owned or legally due the business. 
Total assets include all net values.  These are the amounts 
derived when you subtract depreciation and amortization from the
original costs of acquiring the assets.

Current Assets

     - Cash -- List cash and resources that can be converted into
       cash within 12 months of the date of the balance sheet (or
       during one established cycle of operation). Include money
       on hand and demand deposits in the bank, e.g., checking
       accounts and regular savings accounts.

     - Petty cash -- If your business has a fund for small
       miscellaneous expenditures, include the total here.

     - Accounts receivable -- The amounts due from customers in
       payment for merchandise or services.

     - Inventory -- Includes raw materials on hand, work in
       progress and all finished goods, either manufactured or
       purchased for resale.

     - Short-term investments -- Also called temporary
       investments or marketable securities, these include
       interest- or dividend-yielding holdings expected to be
       converted into cash within a year.  List stocks and bonds,
       certificates of deposit and time-deposit savings accounts
       at either their cost or market value, whichever is less.

     - Prepaid expenses -- Goods, benefits or services a business
       buys or rents in advance. Examples are office supplies,
       insurance protection and floor space.

Long-term Investments

Also called long-term assets, these are holdings the business
intends to keep for at least a year and that typically yield
interest or dividends.  Included are stocks, bonds and savings
accounts earmarked for special purposes.

Fixed Assets

Also called plant and equipment.  Includes all resources a 
business owns or acquires for use in operations and not intended
for resale.  Fixed assets may be leased.  Depending on the 
leasing arrangements, both the value and the liability of the
leased property may need to be listed on the balance sheet.

     - Land -- List original purchase price without allowances
       for market value.

     - Buildings

     - Improvements

     - Equipment

     - Furniture

     - Automobile/vehicles


Liabilities

Current Liabilities

List all debts, monetary obligations and claims payable within 12
months or within one cycle of operation.  Typically they include
the following:

     - Accounts payable -- Amounts owed to suppliers for goods
       and services purchased in connection with business   
       operations.

     - Notes payable -- The balance of principal due to pay off
       short-term debt for borrowed funds. Also includes the
       current amount due of total balance on notes whose terms
       exceed 12 months.

     - Interest payable -- Any accrued fees due for use of both
       short- and long-term borrowed capital and credit extended
       to the business.

     - Taxes payable -- Amounts estimated by an accountant to
       have been incurred during the accounting period.

     - Payroll accrual -- Salaries and wages currently owed.


Long-term Liabilities


Notes payable -- List notes, contract payments or mortgage 
payments due over a period exceeding 12 months or one cycle of
operation. They are listed by outstanding balance less the 
current position due.

Net worth

Also called owner's equity, net worth is the claim of the 
owner(s) on the assets of the business. In a proprietorship or
partnership, equity is each owner's original investment plus any
earnings after withdrawals.

Total Liabilities and Net Worth

The sum of these two amounts must always match that for total
assets.

______________________________________________________________


                 MONTHLY CASH FLOW PROJECTION


Name of Business  Owner  Type of Business  Prepared by  Date
             Pre-start-  1     2     3     4     5     6   Total 
             up position                              Columns 1-6
Year Month
Est.* Act.* Est.Act. Est.Act. Est.Act. Est.Act. Est.Act.
Est.Act.Est.Act.
1. Cash on hand (beginning
        month)   
2. Cash receipts
   (a) Cash sales
   (b) Collections from credit
        accounts
   (c) Loan or other cash 
       injections (specify)
3. Total cash receipts 
   (2a+2b+2c=3)

4. Total cash available
   (before cash out) (1+3)

5. Cash paid out
   (a) purchases (merchandise) 
   (b) Gross wages (excludes withdrawals)
   (c) Payroll expenses (taxes, etc.)
   (d) Outside services
   (e) Supplies (office and 
       operating)
   (f) Repairs and maintenance
   (g) Advertising
   (h) Car, delivery and travel
   (i) Accounting and legal
   (j) Rent
   (k) Telephone
   (l) Utilities
   (m) Insurance
   (n) Taxes (real estate, etc.)
   (o) Interest
   (p) Other expenses (specify
       each)


   (q) Miscellaneous
        (unspecified)

   (r) Subtotal

   (s) Loan principal payment
   (t) Capital purchases 
        (specify)
   (u) Other start-up costs
   (v) Reserve and/or escrow
       (specify)
   (w) Owner's withdrawal

6. Total cash paid out (5a
    through 5w)

7. Cash position (end of
   month) (4 minus 6)

Essential operating data      
(non-cash flow information)
   A. Sales volume (dollars)
   B. Accounts receivable
      (end on month)
   C. Bad debt (end of
      month)
   D. Inventory on hand (end 
      of month)
   E. Accounts payable (end 
      of month)
_________________________________________________________________


INSTRUCTIONS FOR MONTHLY CASH FLOW PROJECTION


1. Cash on hand (beginning of month) -- Cash on hand same as (7),
      Cash position, pervious month

2. Cash receipts- 
   (a) Cash sales-- All cash sales. Omit credit sales unless cash
       is actually received
   (b) Gross wages (including withdrawals)-- Amount to be   
       expected from all accounts.
   (c) Loan or other cash injection-- Indicate here all cash
       injections not shown in 2(a) or 2(b) above.
3. Total cash receipts (2a+2b+2c=3)
4. Total cash available (before cash out)(1+3)

5. Cash paid out - 
   (a) Purchases (merchandise)--Merchandise for resale or for use
       in product (paid for in current month).
   (b) Gross wages (including withdrawals)--Base pay plus
       overtime (if any)
   (c) Payroll expenses (taxes, etc.)-- Include paid vacations,
       paid sick leave, health insurance, unemployment insurance,
       (this might be 10 to 45% of 5(b))
   (d) Outside services--This could include outside labor and/or
       material for specialized or overflow work, including
       subcontracting
   (e) Supplies (office and operating)--Items purchased for use
       in the business (not for resale)
   (f) Repairs and maintenance-- Include periodic large
       expenditures such as painting or decorating
   (g) Advertising--This amount should be adequate to maintain
       sales volume
   (h) Car, delivery and travel--If personal car is used, charge
       in this column, include parking
   (i) Accounting and legal--Outside services, including, for
       example, bookkeeping
   (j) Rent-- Real estate only (See 5(p) for other rentals)
   (k) Telephone
   (l) Utilities--Water, heat, light and/or power
   (m) Insurance-- Coverage on business property and products
       (fire, liability); also worker's compensation, fidelity,
       etc. Exclude executive life (include in 5(w))
   (n) Taxes (real estate, etc.)-- Plus inventory tax, sales tax,
       excise tax, if applicable
   (o) Interest--Remember to add interest on loan as it is
       injected (See 2(c) above)
   (p) Other expenses (specify each)
       _______________________________________________
       _______________________________________________
       Unexpected expenditures may be included here as a safety
       factor________________________________________
       Equipment expenses during the month should be included
       here (non-capital equipment)__________________________
       When equipment is rented or leased, record payments here
   (q) Miscellaneous (unspecified)--Small expenditures for which
       separate accounts would be practical
   (r) Subtotal--This subtotal indicates cash out for operating
       costs
   (s) Loan principal payment--Include payment on all loans,
       including vehicle and equipment purchases on time payment
   (t) Capital purchases (specify)--Nonexpensed (depreciable)
       expenditures such as equipment, building purchases on time
       payment
   (u) Other start-up costs--Expenses incurred prior to first
       month projection and paid for after start-up
   (v) Reserve and/or escrow (specify)-- Example: insurance, tax
       or equipment escrow to reduce impact of large periodic
       payments
   (w) Owner's withdrawals-- Should include payment for such
       things as owner's income tax, social security, health
       insurance, executive life insurance premiums, etc.

6. Total cash paid out (5a through 5w)

7. Cash position (end on month) (4 minus 6)-- Enter this amount
   in (1) Cash on hand following month--
  
Essential operating data (non-cash flow information)--This is 
basic information necessary for proper planning and for proper 
cash flow projection. Also with this data, the cash flow can be
evolved and shown in the above form.

   A. Sales volume (dollars)--This is a very important figure and
      should be estimated carefully, taking into account size of
      facility and employee output as well as realistic
      anticipated sales (actual sales, not orders received).
   B. Accounts receivable (end of month)-- Previous unpaid credit
      sales plus current month's credit sales, less amounts
      received current month (deduct "C" below)
   C. Bad debt (end on month)-- Bad debts should be subtracted
      from (B) in the month anticipated
   D. Inventory on hand (end on month)-- Last month's inventory
      plus merchandise received and/or manufactured current month
      minus amount sold current month
   E. Accounts payable (end of month) Previous month's payable 
      plus current month's payable minus amount paid during
      month.
   F. Depreciation--Established by your accountant, or value of
      all your equipment divided by useful life (in months) as
      allowed by Internal Revenue Service




THE BUSINESS PLAN -    APPENDIX 3: INFORMATION RESOURCES

U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA)

The SBA offers an extensive selection of information on most
business management topics, from how to start a business to
exporting your products.

This information is listed in "Resource Directory for Small
Business Management." For a free copy contact your nearest SBA
office.

SBA has offices throughout the country. Consult the U.S. 
Government section in your telephone directory for the office
nearest you. SBA offers a number of programs and services,
including training and educational programs, counseling services,
financial programs and contract assistance. Ask about

*     Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE), a national
      organization sponsored by SBA of over 13,000 volunteer
      business executives who provide free counseling, workshops
      and seminars to prospective and existing small business
      people.

*     Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs), sponsored by
      the SBA in partnership with state and local governments,
      the educational community and the private sector. They
      provide assistance, counseling and training to prospective
      and existing business people.

*     Business Information Centers (BICs), offering state-of-the-
      art technology, informational resources and on-site 
      counseling for start-up and expanding businesses to create
      business, marketing and other plans, do research, and
      receive expert training and assistance.

For more information about SBA business development programs and
services, call the SBA Small Business Answer Desk at 1-800-U-ASK-
SBA (827-5722).


Other U.S. Government Resources

Many publications on business management and other related topics
are available from the Government Printing Office (GPO). GPO
bookstores are located in 24 major cities and listed in the 
Yellow Pages under the "bookstore" heading. You can request a
"Subject Bibliography" by writing to Government Printing Office,
Superintendent of Documents, Washington, DC 20402-9328.

Many federal agencies offer publications of interest to small
businesses. There is a nominal fee for some, but most are free.
Below is a selected list of government agencies that provide
publications and other services targeted to small businesses. To
get their publications, contract the regional offices listed in 
the telephone directory or write to the addresses below:

Consumer Information Center (CIC)
P.O. Box 100
Pueblo, CO  81002
The CIC offers a consumer information catalog of federal
publications.

Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC)
Publications Request
Washington, DC 20207
The CPSC offers guidelines for product safety requirements.

U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)
12th Street and Independence Avenue, SW
Washington, DC 20250

The USDA offers publications on selling to the USDA. Publications
and programs on entrepreneurship are also available through 
county extension offices nationwide.

U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC)
Office of Business Liaison
14th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW
Room 5898C
Washington, DC 20230
DOC's Business Assistance Center provides listings of business
opportunities available in the federal government. This service
also will refer businesses to different programs and services in
the DOC and other federal agencies.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) - Public 
Health Service
Alcohol, Drug Abuse and Mental Health                   
Administration
5600 Fishers Lane
Rockville, MD 20857
Drug Free Workplace Helpline: 1-800-843-4971. Provides 
information on Employee Assistance Programs.
National Institute for Drug Abuse Hotline:
1-800-662-4357. Provides information on preventing substance 
abuse in the workplace.
The National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information: 
1-800-729-6686 toll-free. Provides pamphlets and resource 
materials on substance abuse.

U.S. Department of Labor (DOL)
Employment Standards Administration
200 Constitution Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20210
The DOL offers publications on compliance with labor laws.

U.S. Department of Treasury
Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
P.O. Box 25866
Richmond, VA 23260
1-800-424-3676
The IRS offers information on tax requirements for small
businesses.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Small Business Ombudsman
Crystal Mall - No.2
  Room 1102
1921 Jefferson Davis Highway
Arlington, VA  22202
1-800-368-5888 except in DC and VA
703-557-1938 in DC and VA
The EPA offers more than 100 publications designed to help small
businesses understand how they can comply with EPA regulations.

U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
FDA Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition
200 C Street, SW
Washington, DC 20204
The FDA offers information on packaging and labeling requirements
for food and food-related products.


For More Information

A librarian can help you locate the specific information you need
in reference books. Most libraries have a variety of directories,
indexes and encyclopedias that cover many business topics. They
also have other resources, such as

*    Trade association information
     Ask the librarian to show you a directory of trade
     associations. Associations provide a valuable network of
     resources to their members through publications and
     services such as newsletters, conferences and seminars.

*    Books
     Many guidebooks, textbooks and manuals on small business are
     published annually. To find the names of books not in your
     local library check Books In Prints, a directory of books
     currently available from publishers.

*    Magazine and newspaper articles
     Business and professional magazines provide information that
     is more current than that found in books and textbooks.
     There are a number of indexes to help you find specific
     articles in periodicals.

In addition to books and magazines, many libraries offer free
workshops, lend skill-building tapes and have catalogues and
brochures describing continuing education opportunities. 

